#Quick User guide

This article gives a brief overview over the linguistic meta model Salt and explains how to use and how to work with it's model elements. We only describe the use of the meta model SaltCommon here, which is one of three meta models coming with the Salt project. 
For giving a short but concise feeling of what Salt is made for, we give an example in Java Code, followed by explanations. The description exemplifies the creation of a new corpus, starting from modeling it's structure, the primary data, the tokenization, adding annotations and higher structures like hierarchies and so on. At the end of this article, we show how such a corpus model can be stored into SaltXML and loaded into main memory again.
Salt is a graph meta based model, and therefore each model element in Salt is either a node, an edge (relation), a graph, a label or a layer. This means nodes can be connected via relations. Nodes and relations are contained in a graph. They also can be contained in layers, which define kinds of sub-graphs. A layer itself is also contained in a graph. Each element can be labeled, and even a label can be labeled by another label.

## the sample

In this article, we present only a very simple example to show the main components of Salt in a very brief way. The example is just used to clarify the mechanisms of Salt and therefore does not claim to advocate to a specific linguistic school. In general, Salt is able to contain very complex corpus structures (which means the inner organization of a corpus), having a recursive sub-corpus - super-corpus structure with a lot of primary data. For simplifying the example, we decided to use a single corpus object (which is also the root corpus) containing one document. The document contains the primary text "Is this example more complicated than it appears to be?".  After showing how to create a corpus structure in section [[QuickUserGuide#corpus structure|corpus structure]], we show a tokenization of the primary text by adding one token for each word of that sentence in [[QuickUserGuide#tokenization|tokenization]]. We illustrate how to annotate these words with part-of-speech and lemma annotations. In [[QuickUserGuide#hierarchies|higher hierarchies]], we show the modeling of higher hierarchies having a part-of relationship in Salt, we decided to model a syntax analysis above the given sentence.  In Salt, there also exists a second way of creating aggregations of tokens called 'spans'. The semantics of spans is slightly different compared to that of hierarchies. In contrast to hierarchies, spans aggregate tokens to a set to be annotated once. You might, for instance, not want to annotate a single token only, but a whole structure containing a set of possibly discontinuous tokens. The use of spans is shown in [[QuickUserGuide#spans|spans]] and demonstrated with the use case of an information structure analysis. The last type of model elements we show here is a loose relation or edge between tokens and/or other structures called pointing relation. To show the use of pointing relations in [[QuickUserGuide#pointing relations|pointing relations]], we use an anaphoric annotation to connect the word "it" with the words "This sample". 
